TURNOVER TAX
Follow us on
SMALL BUSINESS
R
R
R
R
R small businesses
TURNOVER TAX
What is Turnover T ax?
Turnover T ax is a simplified system aimed at making it easier for small businesses to
meet their tax obligations. It replaces Income T ax, VAT, Provisional T ax, Capital Gains
T ax and Dividends T ax for small businesses with a qualifying annual turnover of up to
R1 million. A small business that was registered for Turnover T ax from March 2012
can elect to remain in the VAT system.
Small businesses that qualify for Turnover T ax must register for Pay-As-You Earn
(PAYE) if they have employed qualifying employees.
 What are the benefits of Turnover T ax?
•	 Reduced administrative and compliance burden
•	 Reduced tax rates as tax is calculated on turnover instead of profit
•	 T ax savings for qualifying small businesses
Who qualifies for Turnover T ax?
Registration for Turnover T ax system is optional. Any small business with an annual
turnover of R1 million or less may apply to register. The following taxpayers may
qualify:
•	 Individuals (sole proprietors)
•	 Partnerships
•	 Close corporations
•	 Companies
•	 Co-operatives
How does one register for Turnover T ax?
A person qualifying as a small business may apply to register as a small business with
SARS by doing the following:
•	 You may apply to register before the beginning of a year of assessment, that is:
•	 Before 1 March or before a date during the year of assessment prescribed by
•	 SARS; or
•	 Within two months from the date of commencement of business activities during
•	 the course of the year of assessment.
o Download the application (TT01) form from the SARS website at  
www.sars.gov.za
The completed Turnover T ax (TT01) application form can only be submitted via the 
following channels:
•	 At a SARS branch after making an eBooking on the SARS website www.sars.gov.za
•	 Via email using the following addresses applicable to you:
o T ax Practitioners:pcc@sars.gov.za
o T axpayers: contactus@sars.gov.za
•	 SARS will process the application and provide feedback, as a small business
 cannot be registered for only a part of the year of assessment.
How does one pay for Turnover T ax?
•	 The 1st payment is due on the last business day of August
•	 The 2nd payment is due on the last business day of February
•	 The submission of TT03 Turnover T ax returns is in line with the submission of the
•	 annual income tax returns between 1 July and 31 January of the following year
The first two interim payments must be made based on the estimated taxable turnover
of the business for that tax year. After the end of the tax year, a Turnover T ax return
(TT03) that reflects the actual taxable turnover of the business must be completed
and submitted. Any shortfalls or overpayments then become payable or refundable.
The second interim payment must be equal to the amount of turnover tax payable on
the estimate for the full year, less the first interim payment.
The Beneficiary ID and payment reference number are essential and must be
quoted. T o get the Payment Reference Number (PRN) please complete the
Payment Advice form (TT02) , which can be accessed from SARS website at
www.sars.gov.za.
Interest and penalties
Should a small business fail to pay any Turnover T ax when it is payable to SARS,
interest will be charged from:
•	 1 September, in the case of the first interim payment; and
•	 1 March, in the case of the second interim payment
The prescribed rate is payable on the amount of Turnover T ax that should have been
paid until the earlier of:
•	 The date on which the shortfall is received by SARS; and
•	 The last day of the year of assessment (in the case of a first interim payment)
 or the due date of the assessment for that year of assessment (in the case of a
 second interim payment)
A penalty will be imposed if an estimate of the taxable turnover for the second interim
payment is less than 80% of the actual taxable turnover for a year of assessment. The
penalty to be charged will be determined at 20% of the difference between:
•	 The tax payable on 80% of the taxable turnover; and
•	 The tax payable on the estimate that was initially calculated
A penalty will not be imposed if SARS has issued an assessment for a payment due at
the end of a year of assessment (second interim payment).
 
DISCLAIMER: The information contained in this leaflet is intended as guidance only and is 
not considered to be a legal reference, nor is it a binding ruling. The information does not take 
the place of legislation and readers who are in doubt regarding any aspect of the information 
displayed in the leaflet should refer to the relevant legislation, or seek a formal opinion from a 
suitably qualified individual.
August 2022
The penalty will be waived in full or in part if SARS is satisfied or partly satisfied 
that an understatement of the estimated payment was not done deliberately or 
negligently, and that the estimate was made earnestly based on the information 
available.
Record Keeping
A big advantage of turnover tax is the reduced record-keeping requirements. 
The following records must be kept for a minimum of five years from the date 
of submission:
•	 Records of all amounts received
•	 Records of dividends declared
•	 A list of each asset with a cost price of more than R10 000 at the end of the 
year of assessment
•	 Each liability at the end of a year of assessment exceeding R10 000
For more information, you may:
§	 Visit the small business and tax page on the SARS website at
 www.sars.gov.za.
§	 Call the SARS Contact Centre 
o If calling locally, on 0800 007277
o If calling from abroad, on +27 11 602 2093  
(only between 8am and 4pm South African Standard Time)
§	 Send an email to  contactus@sars.gov.za
